Episode 3 - tools and practices (#63)
carpentries-incubator/fair-research-software: episodes/02-tools.md

exercises: 30
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions

> - What tools are available to help us work in a FAIR way?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- What tools are available to help us develop research software in a FAIR way?
```

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Identify some key tools for FAIR research
- Explain why these help us work in a FAIR way
- Install and run key tools on their own workstation

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

> In this course we will introduce you to a group of tools and practices that are commonly used in research to help your work in a FAIR way. You should already have these tools installed on your machine following the setup instructions. Here we will give an overview of the tools, how they help you achieve the aims of FAIR research software and how they work together. In later episodes we will describe some tools in more detail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this course we will introduce you to a group of tools and practices that are commonly used in research to help you develop software in a FAIR way. You should already have these tools installed on your machine following the setup instructions. Here we will give an overview of the tools, how they help you achieve the aims of FAIR research software and how they work together. In later episodes we will describe some tools in more detail.
```

| Tools and practices                         | Findable | Accessible | Interoperable | Reusable |
|---------------------------------------------|----------|------------|---------------|----------|
| Integrated development environment - VSCode |          |            |               | x        |
| Reproducible workflows - Bash shell         |          |            | x             | x        |
| Version control - Git                       | x        |            |               |          |
| Testing                                     |          |            |               | x        |
| Documentation                               | x        |            | x             | x        |
| License                                     |          | x          |               | x        |
| Citation                                    | x        |            |               | x        |
| Software repository - GitHub                | x        | x          |               |          |

## Writing your code

### Development environment

One of the first choices we make when writing code is what tool to use to do the writing.

> You can use a simple text editor such as Notepad, a terminal based tool such as Vim or Emacs, or one of many Integrated Developmet Environments (IDEs) which give you the tools to write, run and debug your code and inspect the output all in one place. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use a simple text editor such as Notepad, a terminal based editor with syntax highlighting such as Vim or Emacs, or one of many Integrated Development Environments (IDEs) which give you the tools to write, run and debug your code and inspect the output all in one place. 
```

It also lets you assign version numbers or tags to particular versions so you can then use those to refer back to them later. For example you can run your code and output some results and add a comment to your output that those results were produced by version 2.4 of your code, so if you try to run the same thing later and find it is different, you can check if it is a change in the code due to using a newer version, or a change in the data, or something else.

We will be using the Git version control system, which can be used through the command line, in a browser or in a desktop application.

### Testing

> Testing ensures that your program is correct. When you write code you often feel very confident that it is perfect, but when writing bigger codes or code that is meant to do complex operations it is very hard to consider all possible edge cases or notice every single typing mistake. Testing also gives other people confidence in your code as they can see an example of how it is meant to run and be assured that it does work correctly on their machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Testing ensures that your code is correct and does what it is set out to do. When you write code you often feel very confident that it is perfect, but when writing bigger codes or code that is meant to do complex operations it is very hard to consider all possible edge cases or notice every single typing mistake. Testing also gives other people confidence in your code as they can see an example of how it is meant to run and be assured that it does work correctly on their machine.
```

We will show different ways to test your code for different purposes. You need to think about what it is that is important to you and any future users or collaborators to decide what kind of testing is most useful for you.

### Documentation

> Docuemtnation comes in many forms - from the names of variables and functions in your code, additional comments that explain some lines, up to a whole webiste full of documentation in function definitions and usage, tutorials and guides. You many not need as much documentation as a large commercial software product, but making your code Reusable relies on other people being able to understand what your code does and how to use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Documentation comes in many forms - from the names of variables and functions in your code, additional comments that explain some lines, up to a whole webiste full of documentation in function definitions and usage, tutorials and guides. You many not need as much documentation as a large commercial software product, but making your code Reusable relies on other people being able to understand what your code does and how to use it.
```

> Docuemtnation comes in many forms - from the names of variables and functions in your code, additional comments that explain some lines, up to a whole webiste full of documentation in function definitions and usage, tutorials and guides. You many not need as much documentation as a large commercial software product, but making your code Reusable relies on other people being able to understand what your code does and how to use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Docuemtnation comes in many forms - from the names of variables and functions in your code, additional comments that explain some lines, up to a whole website full of documentation in function definitions and usage, tutorials and guides. You many not need as much documentation as a large commercial software product, but making your code Reusable relies on other people being able to understand what your code does and how to use it.
```
